Let's actually create an actor and
we're gonna be starting
from scratch here not in this file but
in main.js.
So, I'm gonna to be deleting all of this,
all right.
So let's create a very simple actor.
And echoing the the first
exercise that we did,
we're gonna be doing this
without using any libraries.
So we're gonna push XD to
the side a bit just so
that we understand the actor
model a little bit better.
So we're gonna have function createActor
and let's give it a behavior as well.
So this behavior can be represented
by a function just like
the reducer function that we
talked about in the beginning.
So I'm just gonna call this
function countBehavior and
that takes the current states in an event
and let's just make this really simple.
So if event.type = INC, so
if we're incrementing then we return
state where the count is state.count + 1,
all pretty simple stuff, return the state.
So, in createActor what we ultimately
want to do is we want to return
an object where, just like we
described in this diagram over here,
we could send an event to the actor and
that should do something.
Now, this send is a void function,
which means it doesn't return anything.
It just receives the event and
then it could change its own
behavior with the event but
it's not gonna be synchronous or
immediately respond to the sender.
And so let's also have
an initial state over here.
So we're gonna call it
currentState = behavior.
Let's also have an initial state here.
So we're going to just have the current
state be this initial state.
So whenever we're sent an event,
we're going to update the current state.
So currentState =
behavior(currentState and
the event that we received.
Now this of course looks very familiar
to the first exercise we've done.
So, in a way we're coming
full circle over here.
So now let's create this actor so
const actor = createActor,
and we're gonna create it
with our countsBehavior,
which, again, is just a reducer,
so countBehavior.
And we're gonna give it an initial
state of count of just 42,
just to make sure that things
are working and window.actor = actor.
Okay, so now we have our actor and
we see that this actor,
it definitely has its own local state.
And we know this cuz, well,
we don't know this, because it's internal,
it's local, we can't see it,
but we can send it events.
So, just to make sure that
things are happening and
get a little bit of observability in here,
I'm gonna console.log the current state.
And now we could see that if
we send the actor an event, so
type INC, It's going to log 43.
Remember, we started on 42 and
so now it's on 43.
Now we're gonna send it INC again, 44,
45, 46 and it keeps going up and up.
So that's the actor changing
its own internal states.
Now its internal state can include
other actors that it decides to create.
So all right, we have send.
But to make things a little
bit more practical for
real world usage we also want some way to
subscribe to the actor's current state,
if the actor so
chooses to share that state with us.
So, let's create,
I'm just gonna call this listeners,
and this is going to be a set.
And so we're gonna subscribe to these.
So subscrib Listener and
listeners.add that listener and
we're also gonna call the listener
with the current state.
So every time the state changes here,
now we're gonna have
some way of notifying or
emitting the current state
to all of our listeners.
So listeners.forEach listener,
we're gonna call listener
with the new currentState.
Okay, so let's try this.
If we do actor.subscribe now,
and we say whatever the value is,
we're gonna console.Log the value.
And now if we send,
it's going to log the value all the same.
Remember, we got rid of our
console.log in here and
now we're doing it by
using that subscriber.
So you could think of this subscriber
as an implicit way of sending events.
And so what we could sort of
conceptually do with actors too
is have some way of saying,
okay, let's pretend that I'm
already subscribed to you but
I'm not going to be listening.
Or I don't want to receive an event for
every single time you update.
I just sorta want you to cache that away.
And so I can easily access that value that
you emitted to me, just whenever I want.
And so that's what we could do with,
if we have some sorta
getSnapshot function,
we could just return the currentState.
All right, so now if we send
the actor a bunch of stuff and
we say actor.getSnapshot
now we have counts 51.
Because remember,
this is in implicit subscription,
we're not directly reading
the actor's internal state.
We're just getting the last known value or
the last known snapshot of that actor.
And so, this in short, the reason why
I created this from scratch is becasue
I wanted to show you just how things
are working internally with X State and
X State's version of the actor model.
So the core the functionality of an actor
is being able to send it an event.
These other two things don't
directly break the actor model, but
they just make it a lot more practical for
real world usage.
So subscribe and getSnapshot,
you can think of these as abstractions
on top of the actor model.